---
layout: post
published: true
categories: blogs
title: Role of Nonlinearlity in the Origin of Life
---

*This article was originally written as the final report for PHYS 478: Nonlinear
Dynamics and Chaos. For the purpose of publishing it here, I slightly modified
it in terms of format as well as content.*

In this post, I am going to address the problem of the origin of homochirality
in life, i.e., given that the homochirality is not natural in the sense that a
reaction always produces racemic mixture, why is it the case that life only uses
homochiral molecules? Life couldn’t emerge if it was not the case. So, how come
homochirality emerges in prebiotic molecules that eventually gave origin to
life? We are going to find (partial) answer to this question in this post.
Before beginning, let's get introduced to some of the terms and concepts that we
will use here.

From the freshman level organic chemistry, we know that there is a
classification of isomers called enantiomers. Molecule A and B are called
enantiomers of each other if they are non-superposable mirror images of
each-other. Chirality is the fundamental feature that causes a pair of molecules
to be enantiomer. If the mirror image of a molecule is identical to the original
molecule, then we call the molecule achiral. On the other hand, if the mirror
image of a molecule is not identical to the original molecule, then we say that
both molecules are chiral molecules. We denote the two chiral molecules with
D-molecule and L-molecule in order to distinguish them (there are other
conventions but I will stick with it). It’s important to note that both of the
molecules have the identical chemical and physical properties. They only differ
optically in the sense that they have different direction of rotation of the
plane of polarized light.

If a sample of solution contains equal number of D-molecules and L-molecules,
then we say that we have a racemic mixture. On the other hand, if a sample
contains only molecules of one chirality (either D-molecule or L-molecule but
not both), we call this sample a homochiral sample. If, in a reaction, chiral
molecule can produce, then they produce in a racemic mixture provided that no
special catalyst is used. Last but not least we say that a reaction is
autocatalytic when one of the products of the reaction acts as a catalyst of
that reaction.

There are two features that is found universally (with very rare exception) in
all of the life on earth: the homochirality of amino acids and sugars, and the
universality of the genetic code. All of the life, almost exclusively use
L-amino acids and D-sugars. It turns out that the homochirality of amino acid is
very important because it helps in protein folding-unfolding which is essential
to life.

Now, the big debate is that how come homochirality emerged in life! Naturally,
it should have a racemic mixture of molecules but in reality we find homochiral
molecules. There are three main camps in this debate. The first camp claims that
homochirality emerged before the origin of life and it was a prerequisite for
life (they offer several mechanisms of how homochirality emerged from achiral
molecules), the second camp claims that homochirality is a consequence of life,
and lastly the third camp claims that homochirality is a result of physical
asymmetry, i.e.,asymmetries in the physical laws give rise to the homochirality.
Most people (including Jafarpour et. al.) rejects the third camp because the
underlying physical asymmetry can only give rise of an excess of a chiral
molecule. However, homochirality refers to the 100% dominance of one chirality
over another. Also, there is no good reasons to believe that homochirality is a
consequence of life. That's why we think there must be a symmetry breaking
mechanism.

Charles Franck suggested a mechanism that says homochirality is a consequence of
chemical autocatalysis. Frank’s mechanism is based on the concept of
non-linearity. He introduces an inhibition reaction coupled with an
autocatalytic reaction that can give emergence to homochirality. Before
proceeding, let me discuss what we mean by a mechanism of the origin of
homochirality. If a system has several (at least two) equally likely outcomes
but exhibits only certain (or one) outcome(s), then the system is asymmetric
with respect to those outcomes. For example, achiral molecules produce a racemic
mixture of chiral molecules. However, we see only homochiral molecules in life.
So, we say that somewhere sometimes their symmetry broke and the system (here
life) chose one outcome (here homochirality). This is called symmetry-breaking.
This symmetry can break spontaneously, or due to fluctuations, or amplification.
Frank’s model shows that the symmetry of D and L molecules broke because of
amplification i.e. an autocatalysis reaction occurred that was coupled with an
inhibition reaction.

Frank proposed three chemical reactions: (reaction rate inside the parenthesis)

1.

$$
autocatalysis of D-molecule: A + D → 2D  (ka)
$$

2.

$$
autocatalysis of L-molecule: A + L → 2L  (k_a)
$$

3.

$$
chiral inhibition (mutual antagonism of D-molecule and L-molecule): D + L → 0  (ki)
$$

Now, the law of mass action says that the rate of an equation is directly
proportional to the product of the concentrations of the reactants. So, for the
following reaction with reaction rate $$k$$,$$aA + bB = cC + dD$$, we can say
that at equilibrium \\( $$k = ([A]a[B]b)\over([C]c[D]d)$$\\) where $$[X]$$
refers to the concentration of molecule $$X$$. Anyways, we only need this law in
an intuitive manner. So, let’s see the time evolution of the concentrations of D
and L in this system. Let $$[D]$$ and $$[L]$$ be instantaneous concentrations of
D-molecule and L-molecule, respectively, at some time $$t$$. Then, mass-action
law says, at time $$t$$, $$[D]$$ is increasing at a rate $$k_a[A][D]$$ due to
reaction **(1)** and is decreasing at a rate ki*[L]*[D] due to reaction (2). So,
ⅆ[D]/ⅆt=K_a [A][D]-K_i [L][D] Similarly, we will have, ⅆ[L]/ⅆt=K_a [A][L]-K_i
[L][D] Doing a linearization, the corresponding matrix equation is: (█(d ̇\@l ̇
))=(■(k_a A&-k_i d\@-k_i l&k_a A))(█(d\@l)) where, for the simplicity, d = [D],
l = [L] and we use dot-notation for the time derivative. In the matrix, the
trace and the determinant are: τ=2k_a A and Δ=k_a\^2 A2-k_i2 lⅆ So, there will
be a saddle point if Δ\<0 or ld\>((k_a A)/k_i )\^2 . Also, since ka, ki and all
the concentrations are positive number (non-trivial case), τ \> 0 and
τ2-4Δ=4k_i2 ld\>0. Therefore, for ld\<((k_a A)/k_i )\^2 there exists an unstable
node for non-zero concentration. This is seen in figure 1, where we plotted the
phase portrait of [D] and [L] , x and y in the figure respectively.

Figure 1: Phase portrait of Frank's original proposal. Two equilibrium points
can be seen, an unstable node at (0,0) and a saddle point at (1.4,1.4)
[Generated using pplane8.m] From now on in the phase portrait x and y will
denote [D] and [L], respectively. Frank’s Modified Model: Notice that in
reaction (3), we used a mutual antagonistic reaction and keep [A] as constant in
the whole system. This doesn’t conserve the total number of molecules. The
authors proposed a modified version where we changed the reaction (3) to: (3\*)
chiral inhibition: D + L → 2A (ki) So, [A] becomes a variable. From the
mass-action law we have: ⅆ[A]/ⅆt=〖2K〗_i [D][L]-K_a [A][D]-K_a [A][L] Now, let
N:= [A] + [D] + [L], which should be a constant. Now, to plot the phase portrait
of this modified system with [A] = N – [D] – [L] instead of [A] = a constant.  
Figure 2: Phase portrait of the modified Frank's model where we replaced D+L→0
to D+L→2A. The green line indicates stable orbits. Notice that in figure 2, two
new equilibrium points have emerged: at ([D], [L]) = (N, 0) and (0, N). This is
essentially FIG. 2(a) in the paper. However, I couldn’t discard the area of the
phase portrait where [D] + [L] + [A] exceeds N. Anything above the straight
line, y=-x+3 as well as any negative concentrations, do not make sense. So, we
should discard it. If we define a chiral order parameter, ω=([D]-[L])/([D]+[L] )
, then in terms of ω we can say the three non-trivial equilibrium points as ω=0
(the unstable saddle point near the center which is the racemic state), at ω=1
i.e. the stable fixed point at ([D], [L]) = (N, 0), and at ω = -1 i.e. the
stable fixed point at ([D], [L]) = (0, N). While Frank’s original model gives us
homochirality but the indefinite growth of the homochiral molecule, this
modified model provides us steady states. But is Chiral Inhibition Necessary or
Sufficient? We have seen that when an inhibition reaction occurred along with an
autocatalytic reaction, homochirality emerges. However, evidence suggests that
inhibition does not necessarily occur with autocatalytic reaction. It warrants
the question that whether it is possible to have homochirality without the
inhibition reaction. Let’s see what happens if we replace the inhibition
reaction with decay reaction. Reaction (1) and (2) are the same. We will replace
reaction (3) (or (3\*) in the modified model) with a set of linear decay
reaction (4) and (5): (4) D → A (kd) (5) L → A (kd) So, the system is
ⅆ[D]/ⅆt=K_a [A][D]-K_d [D] , ⅆ[L]/ⅆt=K_a [A][L]-K_d [L] ⅆ[A]/ⅆt=K_d [D]+K_d
[L]-K_a [A][D]-K_a [A][L] Holding the same assumption as before, the phase
portrait is drawn in figure 3.

Figure 3: Frank's model when the chiral inhibition reaction is replaced by two
linear decay reactions. Here the trivial equilibrium point (0,0) has not been
highlighted. Surprisingly, we see that the homochirality vanishes and instead we
end up with a bunch of fixed points along the nullclines. Similar to figure 2,
ignore any vector field above the black straight line. This shows that if we
replace the non-linear inhibition reaction with two linear decay reaction, then
we end up with some constant concentration of D and L-molecule. But what happens
if we make the linear decay reaction reversible? Making a reaction reversible is
the same thing as considering the products as the reactants and vice-versa. So,
along with reaction (4) and (5), we will have the reverse of them: (6) A → D
(kd) (7) A → L (kd) So, the system is ⅆ[D]/ⅆt=K_a [A][D]-K_d [D]+K_d [A] ,
ⅆ[L]/ⅆt=K_a [A][L]-K_d [L]+K_d [A] ⅆ[A]/ⅆt=K_d [D]+K_d [L]-K_a [A][D]-K_a
[A][L]-2K_d [A] Figure 4 shows the phase portrait for this
reversible-linear-decay variant of Frank’s model.

Figure 4: this shows that in case the linear decay reactions were reversible,
the racemic state would have been the global attractor. This figure is even more
surprising in the sense that when the decay reactions were linear and
irreversible, we ended up having infinitely many possible steady states where
[D] and [L] can take any values. However, making the linear decay reactions
reversible, we lost all the fixed points except one, which is the racemic state
(because [D] = [L]). But notice also that now that state became a global
attractor. You can start from anywhere (even from a homochiral state) in the
system but you will quickly end up with the racemic state. All these
observations suggest that nonlinear terms due to inhibition reaction should be
taken to obtain a homochiral state. However, the authors suggest that the system
can still approach a homochiral state without an inhibition reaction scheme if
we take the underlying noise from the autocatalytic reaction into account i.e.
nonlinearity is not necessary for homochirality, instead a stochastic treatment
of the autocatalytic reactions can give rise to a homochiral state. What is
Stochastic Treatment: What I understood about the stochastic process is that it
comes in contrast with the deterministic process. For example, let’s say a
particle changed its position from some state x to another state y. Now if we
are also given some trajectory of that particle with certainty (whatever the
trajectory is – be it a straight line or a cycloidal path), then this is called
the deterministic treatment. But if the particle changes its position like a
Brownian motion, then the treatment should be stochastic. In this paper,
stochastic chemical reaction refers to the stochastic version of the mass-action
law. So, instead of writing an equation of the rate of change of the
concentrations, we can write the probability of the system having certain
concentrations. This is given by the master equation: ∂P(x ⃗,t)/∂t=V∑_y ⃗▒[T(├ x ⃗
┤\| y ⃗ )P(y ⃗,t)-T(y ⃗\|x ⃗ )p(x ⃗,t)] Which seems intuitive given the definition of
T(├ x ⃗ ┤\| y ⃗ ) and P(y ⃗,t). P(y ⃗,t) is the probability of the system being at a
state y at time t. And T(├ x ⃗ ┤\| y ⃗ ) is the probability of the system
transiting from a state x to a state y per unit time per unit volume. However, I
couldn’t follow the derivation of this exact master equation. I am not familiar
with this type of mathematics. But as I try to follow, I couldn’t derive eq(15)
from eq(14), for instance. They seem to use T(├ x ⃗ ┤\| y ⃗ )=T(y ⃗\|x ⃗ ) for which
I do not find any rationale. How come Stochastic Treatment Give Rise to
Homochirality: After applying the stochastic treatment, they successfully showed
(which I do not understood mathematically) that intrinsic noise of the
autocatalytic reactions is the maximum at the racemic state but zero (minimum)
at both of the homochiral states. So, they investigated the time-evolution of
the chiral order parameter ω and noticed that at the racemic state due to the
maximum noise ω deviates, so does the system. However, after sufficient time
when ω reaches one of the homochiral states, it doesn’t deviate anymore cause
the noise at the homochiral states is zero. They also explained why the noise at
the homochiral state is zero. Since at the homochiral state, only one of the two
chiral molecules exists. So, all the other reaction stops except the
autocatalysis of the that chiral molecule whose homochiral state it is. Thus,
homochirality emerges. What I don’t understand, probably I am missing something
because of not understanding the mathematical part, is that why in the
homochiral state all the other reaction rates become zero. Suppose the system is
in a D-molecule homochiral state. So, there is no L-molecule. So, I understand
that reaction (2) and (5) won’t occur. However, there exist achiral D-molecule
which can produce chiral L-molecule from reaction (7).  
Lastly, I couldn’t do the Gillespie simulation. I only plotted the analytical
result they achieved for the rate of change of the probability density function
of the chiral order parameter, which has the solution P_s (w)=Γ(α+1/2)/(√π Γ(α)
) (1-ω\^2 )\^((k_n V)/k_a -1) Stationary Distribution Plot:  
Figure 5: This is the stationary distribution plot for different values of α
MATLAB CODE: w = -1:0.001:+1; a = [0.01;0.1;1;10;100]; Y = (gamma(a +
0.5)./(sqrt(pi).*gamma(a))).*(1-w.2).(a-1); figure plot(w,Y) legend(compose('a =
%.1f',a), 'Location','best') ylim([0 6]) xlabel("w") ylabel("P(w)")
